Table of Contents
Project Information

Who created this project and why?
What is this project about?
How was the data collected for this project?
How does it work?
What are the prerequisites for this project?
What are the key findings of this project?
FAQ

Bio Basics
ML Basics
Other Questions
Project Organization

If you're using jupyter notebooks:

1) First download the Genotypes file
2) Run the Data_Cleaning_Pipeline.ipynb script
3) Then run a classifier model script e.g. GWAS_LogisticRegression.ipynb
4) Run through all the other classifiers one-by-one
If you're using command line:

1) First download the Genotypes file
2) Run the Data_Cleaning_Pipeline.py script
Option 1
3) Then run a RNA-seq script 
4) Run through all the other classifiers one-by-one

FAQ
Bio Basics
1) What is IBD?

A) Inflammatory Bowel Disease (IBD) is an autoimmune condition of the colon and small intestine. Crohn's disease and ulcerative colitis are the principal types of inflammatory bowel disease. Crohn's disease affects the small intestine and large intestine, as well as the mouth, esophagus, stomach and the anus, whereas ulcerative colitis primarily affects the colon and the rectum. IBD is a complex disease which arises as a result of the interaction of environmental and genetic factors leading to immunological responses and inflammation in the intestine. (source : Wikipedia) https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Inflammatory_bowel_disease

2) Why are you looking at genetic features?

A) A genetic component to IBD has been recognized for over a century.[1] Research that has contributed to understanding of the genetics include studies of ethnic groups (e.g., Ashkenazi Jews), familial clustering, epidemiological studies, and twin studies. With the advent of molecular genetics, understanding of the genetic basis has expanded considerably, particularly in the past decade.[2] The first gene linked to IBD was NOD2 in 2001. Genome-wide association studies have since added to understanding of the genomics and pathogenesis of the disease. More than 200 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs or "snips") are now known to be associated with susceptibility to IBD.[3] One of the largest genetic studies of IBD was published in 2012 .[4] The analysis explained more of the variance in Crohn's disease and ulcerative colitis than previously reported.[2] (source : Wikipedia) https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Inflammatory_bowel_disease

Another reason to look at genetic features is that the genome is essentially fixed at conception i.e. the genome sequence doesn't change over a person's lifetime (ignoring telomeres and spontaneous mutations that occur over a persons lifetime).

ML Basics
1) What is machine learning and how does it work?

A) Machine learning involves the use some advanced statistical techniques to perform tasks like classification (healthy vs diseased, cat vs dog,) or regression (predicting house prices, or who survived the titanic, or the height of a person given the weight etc). There are dozens of different algorithms such as KNN, logistic regression, SVM, multi-layer perceptron etc. Each works in a slightly different way, however most algorithms involve some form of curve-fitting i.e. generating an equation that describes the relationship between the input variables and the output variables. This is usually done in two phases. In the training phase, the algorithm "learns" to detect patterns from a subset of the data (the training set). Once a model has been trained, you can try to predict the output variables from a different subset of the data (the test set). By tallying up the correct / incorrect predictions generated by the model we can score the performance of each model using metrics like accuracy, precision, recall etc. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Machine_learning

2) How do you calculate precision, recall and accuracy?

A) For a classification task,

Accuracy = (tp + tn) / (tp + tn + fp + fn)

Precision = tp / (tp + fp)

Recall = tp / (tp + fn)

where tp = true positives, fp = false positives, tn = true negatives, fn = false negatives

3) How can I use machine learning tools?

A) For this project I used a python package called sci-kitlearn which natively supports several dozen machine learning algorithms with an API that's fairly straightforward to use. Othe packages such as keras, tensorflow and pytorch have been created for more complex models that involve neural networks. For this project I mainly used sci-kitlearn.
